{\rtf1\ansi\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0 \fswiss Helvetica;}{\f1 Courier;}}
{\colortbl;\red255\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;}
\widowctrl\hyphauto

{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs36 Advantages and Disadvantages of Relational Databases (RDBMS) vs NoSQL Databases\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Relational Databases (RDBMS)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Examples: MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle Database, Microsoft SQL Server\line Structure: Tables with rows and columns\line Schema: Fixed and predefined\line Query Language: SQL (Structured Query Language)\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Advantages of Relational Databases\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Strong Consistency (ACID Properties)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Guaranteed Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability (ACID) ensure reliable transactions.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Essential for mission-critical systems (e.g., finance, banking, healthcare).\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Structured and Organized Data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Ideal when data fits neatly into predefined tables and relationships.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Powerful for managing complex queries and relationships through joins.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Standardized Query Language (SQL)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab SQL offers deep analytical and reporting functionality.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Widespread knowledge base and tools make it developer-friendly.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Data Integrity and Accuracy\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Enforced through primary keys, foreign keys, and constraints to prevent inconsistent data.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 5.\tx360\tab Mature Ecosystem\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Decades of proven performance, stability, and support tools (e.g., replication, security, backup).\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Disadvantages of Relational Databases\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Scalability Limitations\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Designed for vertical scaling (adding more power to one server).\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Horizontal scaling (across many servers) is technically complex and costly.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Rigid Schema\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Schema changes require migrations and potential downtime.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Less ideal when structure evolves frequently.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Performance Bottlenecks at Large Scale\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Complex joins and normalized data can slow performance for large-volume workloads.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Limited Support for Unstructured Data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Not optimized for diverse formats such as JSON, images, videos, or logs.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 NoSQL Databases\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 Examples: MongoDB, Cassandra, Redis, Couchbase, DynamoDB, Neo4j\line Structure: Document, key\u8211-value, wide-column, or graph data models\line Schema: Flexible or schema-less\line Query Language: Varies (not SQL-based)\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Advantages of NoSQL Databases\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Horizontal Scalability\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Easily distributes data across multiple servers or clusters.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Perfect for cloud and high-traffic environments.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab Flexible Schema Design\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Schema-less structure allows for rapid adaptation to changing data models.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Great for agile development and evolving datasets.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab High Performance\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Optimized for fast reads/writes \u8212- supports large-scale, high-velocity data.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Ideal for real-time analytics or caching layers.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Supports Unstructured and Semi-Structured Data\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Handles JSON, XML, time-series, graph, or multimedia data effectively.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 5.\tx360\tab Built for Distributed Systems\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Offers built-in replication, partitioning, and fault tolerance.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs28 Disadvantages of NoSQL Databases\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 1.\tx360\tab Weak or Eventual Consistency (BASE)\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Often prioritizes speed and availability over immediate data consistency.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Not ideal for systems that need guaranteed transaction accuracy in real time.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 2.\tx360\tab No Standard Query Language\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Each database has its own syntax or API \u8212- harder for teams to switch systems.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 3.\tx360\tab Limited Support for Complex Relationships\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Lack of joins makes it difficult to query across related data without duplication.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 4.\tx360\tab Possible Data Redundancy\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Denormalized structure can cause data duplication and higher update complexity.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 5.\tx360\tab Younger Ecosystem\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Although improving rapidly, some platforms have fewer tools and standard practices than RDBMS.\sa180\sa180\par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 Comparison Table\par}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx1542\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx6170\clbrdrb\brdrs\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Feature\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Relational Database (RDBMS)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 NoSQL Database\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Data Model\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Tables (structured)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Document, key\u8211-value, graph, or column\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Schema\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Fixed\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Flexible or schema-less\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Consistency Model\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Strong (ACID)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Eventual (BASE)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Scalability\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Vertical (scale-up)\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Horizontal (scale-out)\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Best For\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Structured data & transactions\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Big, evolving, or unstructured data\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Flexibility\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Low\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 High\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Query Language\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Standard SQL\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Varies per database\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{
\trowd \trgaph120
\cellx1542\cellx6170\cellx8638
\trkeep\intbl
{
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Performance\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Consistent\par}
\cell}
{{\pard\intbl \ql \f0 \sa0 \li0 \fi0 Optimized for distributed workloads\par}
\cell}
}
\intbl\row}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \par}
{\pard \qc \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\emdash\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa180 \li0 \fi0 \b \fs32 When to Use Each\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Choose Relational Databases when:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab You require high data integrity and stable structure.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Use cases: Finance, HR systems, ERP, healthcare, compliance-based systems.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Choose NoSQL Databases when:\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab You manage large, dynamic, or unstructured data that scales globally.\line \par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li720 \fi-360 \endash \tx360\tab Use cases: Web apps, IoT, e-commerce analytics, social platforms.\sa180\par}
{\pard \ql \f0 \sa0 \li360 \fi-360 \bullet \tx360\tab Modern Approach:\line Many modern systems combine both \u8212- an RDBMS for transactions and a NoSQL database for scalability and analytics (polyglot persistence).\sa180\par}
}
